new testing guide (first draft) (#651)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: src/routes/guides/testing-your-app.mdx

```
  </div>
  <div id="pnpm">
```bash frame="none"
pnpm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
</TabsCodeBlocks>

### Package explanations

- `vitest` - testing framework including runner, assertion engine, mocking facilities
- `jsdom` - virtual DOM to simulate a headless browser environment running in node
- `@solidjs/testing-library` - testing library to simplify testing components, directives and primitives, with automatic cleanup
- `@testing-library/user-event` - simulating user events close to reality
- `@testing-library/jest-dom` - augments expect with helpful matchers

If the application is using [SolidStart](/solid-start), then also create a `vitest.config.ts` file:

```ts title="vitest.config.ts"
import solid from "vite-plugin-solid"
import { defineConfig } from "vitest/config"

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [solid()],
  resolve: {
    conditions: ["development", "browser"],
  },
})
```

Also, add a `test` script calling vitest to `package.json`:

```json title="package.json"
  "scripts": {
    "test": "vitest"
  }
```

> If you are using typescript, you may want to add `@testing-library/jest-dom` to `tsconfig.json#compilerOptions.types`.

Author: No. If it is installed, vite-plugin-solid will automatically include it in the setupFiles. I should know, since I added that feature ;-)

## Components testing

Testing components mainly involves three things:

- Rendering the component
- Interacting with the component
- Validating assertions

```tsx title="Counter.test.tsx"
import { test, expect } from "vitest"
import { render } from "@solidjs/testing-library"
import userEvent from "@testing-library/user-event"
import { Counter } from './Counter'

test("increments value", async () => {
  const { queryByRole } = render(() => <Counter />)
  const counter = queryByRole('button')
  expect(counter).toHaveTextContent("1")

>   await userEvent.click(counter)

Author: If we are not using fake timers, setup is optional, even though it is recommended. We could call it for consistency, though.

  debug, // a function giving some helpful debugging output
  unmount, // manually removing the component from the container
  ...queries, // functions to select elements from the container
} = renderResult
```

#### Using the right queries

```
                                          ⎧ Role
                              get ⎫  By   ⎪ DisplayValue
                            query ⎬       ⎨ LabelText
                             find ⎭ AllBy ⎪ Text
                                          ⎩ ...
```

The first and second part depends on if the query should wait for the element to (not) appear and if it should throw if the element cannot be found:

- **getBy**: synchronous, throws if not found or more than 1 matches
- **getAllBy**: synchronous, throws if not found, returns array of matches
- **queryBy**: synchronous, null if not found, error if more than 1 matches
- **queryAllBy**: synchronous, returns array of zero or more matches
- **findBy**: asynchronous, rejected if not found within 1000ms or more than 1 matches, resolves wth element if found
- **findAllBy**: asynchronous, rejected if not found within 1000ms, resolves with array of one or more element(s)

> If the `location` option is used or the component is based on resources, the router will be lazy-loaded, thus the first query after rendering needs to be `find...`. If it should be tested whether something is not rendered, first find something that will be rendered and then use `query...`; for everything else use `get...`. 

Author: I already tried it as a warning, but that was somehow easily overlooked, so my next attempt is to reinforce the learning through repetition ;-)

> The last part depends on the characteristics of the element you want to select. If possible, try to select for accessible attributes (role, label, placeholder, text, ...):

Author: Actually, that would be a pretty unhelpful rule, as you could obviously query for an input rule in a form with multiple fields, but it would make more sense to go with the label in this case. One should strive for a compromise between having a simple and maintainable query and preferably using only accessible attributes.

> The last part depends on the characteristics of the element you want to select. If possible, try to select for accessible attributes (role, label, placeholder, text, ...):

Author: I've rewrote the section so it matches more with testing library docs.

#### Testing in context

The component might be reliant on some context. In order to wrap it, use the `wrapper`-option. 

```tsx title="Context.test.tsx"
import { test, expect } from "vitest"
import { render } from "@solidjs/testing-library"
import { DataContext, DataConsumer } from "./Data"

const wrapper = (props) => <DataContext value="test" {...props} />

test("receives data from context", () => {
  const { queryByText } = render(() => <DataConsumer />, { wrapper })
  expect(getByText("test")).toBeInTheDocument()
});
```

Wrappers can be re-used if they are created externally. For wrappers with different values, a higher-order component creating the required wrappers can make the tests more concise:

```tsx
const createWrapper = (value) => (props) => 
  <DataContext value={value} {...props}/>
```

<Callout title="Using multiple providers">
If using multiple providers, [solid-primitives](https://primitives.solidjs.community/) has [`<MultiProvider>`](https://primitives.solidjs.community/package/context#multiprovider) to avoid nesting multiple levels of providers
</Callout>

#### Testing routes

> For convenience, `render` supports the `location`-option that wraps the rendered component in a router pointing at the given location. Since the `<Router>` component is lazily loaded, the first query after rendering needs to be asynchronous, i.e. `findBy...`:

Author: It makes sense to repeat the detail for me, since it is relevant in both cases. At least it should be overlooked half as much this way, shouldn't it?

```tsx
const { findByText } = render(
  () => <Route path="/article/:id" component={Article} />,
  { location: "/article/12345" }
);
expect(await findByText("Article 12345")).toBeInTheDocument()
```

### Interacting with components

Many components are not static, but instead change on user interactions. These interactions need to be simulated to test the changes. To simulate user interactions, the creators of testing-library have provided the `@testing-library/user-event` library. It takes care of the usual order of events as they would occur in actual user interactions, e.g. that a `click` is accompanied by `mousemove`, `hover`, `keydown`, `focus`, `keyup`, and `keypress`.

If you want to use fake timers with `vi.useFakeTimers()` in your tests, be sure to set it up:

```tsx frame="none"
import { vi } from "vitest"

const user = userEvent.setup({ advanceTimers: vi.advanceTimersByTime })

> ```

Reviewer: does it make sense to add the fakeTimers part here? If the focus of this section is interaction we should just mention userEvent normally. Perhaps the fakeTimers part can be an aside thing

Author: Let me think a bit on this one.

Author: I think I can combine it with the example.

> The most convenient events are usually `click`, `keyboard` and `pointer` (to simulate touch events). Learn more about them on the [user-event documentation](https://testing-library.com/docs/user-event/intro).

Reviewer: Also, should we add a normal test example where we use the user-event to its fullest?

Author: I like the idea and am afraid at the same time that the guide is too long as it is already... I think I'll add one.

- `.toHaveFocus()` - checks if this is the currently focused element
- `.toHaveAccessibleDescription(description)` - checks accessible description
- and a [lot more](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#custom-matchers).

## Directive testing

[Directives](/reference/jsx-attributes/use) are reusable behavior for elements. As such, they get a reference to the element and the property value given to them as an accessor. To make testing them more concise, our `@solidjs/testing-library` has a renderDirective function:

```ts frame="none"
const renderResult = renderDirective(directive, {
  initialValue, // value initially added to the argument signal
  targetElement, // opt. node name or element used as target for the directive
  ...renderOptions, // see render options
})
const {
  arg, // getter for the directive's argument
  setArg, // setter for the directive's argument
  ...renderResults, // see render results
} = renderResult
```

The `container` from the `...renderResults` will contain the targetElement (default is a `<div>`). That and the ability to manipulate the `arg` signal are helpful in testing directives.

> If for example there is a [directive that handles the Fullscreen API](https://github.com/solidjs-community/solid-primitives/blob/main/packages/fullscreen/src/index.ts), it could be tested like this:

Reviewer: I am not sure about the guidelines regarding this, and perhaps @LadyBluenotes could give me quick help. But does it make sense to link people away for something that will be affected from the next test? Perhaps we should find a way of having this snippet here

Author: I can include the code (or a reduced version) as an example.

```ts title="fullscreen.test.ts"

> import { test, expect, vi } from "vitest"

Author: We no longer set globals to true in the vite-plugin by default. I don't have a preference, except for consistency.

  const { result } = renderHook(createCounter)
  expect(result.count).toBe(0)
  result.increment()
  expect(result.count).toBe(1)
})
```

## Testing effects

Since effects may happen asynchronous, it can be difficult to test them. `@solidjs/testing-library` comes with a `testEffect` function that takes another function, which will receive a `done` function that can be called once the tests are over. It returns a promise that is resolved once done is called. Errors that would hit the next boundary are used to reject the returned promise.

A test using it might look similar to this:

```ts frame="none"
const [value, setValue] = createSignal(0)
return testEffect(done =>
  createEffect((run: number = 0) => {
    if (run === 0) {
      expect(value()).toBe(0)
      setValue(1)
    } else if (run === 1) {
      expect(value()).toBe(1)
      done()
    }
    return run + 1
  })
)
```

## Other testing frameworks

Even though it takes much more configuration, it is still possible to test Solid.js applications in [jest](https://dev.to/lexlohr/testing-your-solidjs-code-2gfh) or [other testing libraries](https://dev.to/lexlohr/testing-solidjs-code-beyond-jest-39p).

> 

Reviewer: Is it possible to include a takeaway from those posts and have it here instead?
We would like to avoid personal content here and have the only links in the docs to be to reference sites or other docs.

Author: This would be rather long, since the required configuration would fill about 1-2 screen pages alone, even if you disregard different options for the jest transformation and only include babel, which is the shorter one.

Reviewer: I understand that, but I believe we have a recommendation to avoid linking outside of the docs to content that is not mdn or official documentation.  Maybe we could either extend this page with that content or add a separate guide for these testing frameworks. What are your thoughts on this @LadyBluenotes ?

Reviewer 2: Imho, we can probably just remove this section. 

Not necessarily because it's not helpful, but it doesn't really add anything. We can always add support for other testing libraries down the line, if they're requested.

Author: I've removed it.

---
title: Testing your App
order: 6
---

> This guide should cover the basics of testing a Solid.js application to inspire confidence during the further development.

Reviewer: Final comment from my side:
In the docs, we try to use just Solid or SolidJS. Can we replace all instances of Solid.js here for one of those?
Also can we make sure we have no lowercase solid as well :)

Author: Can do.

## Set up testing

> The preferred method of testing Solid applications is [vitest](https://vitest.dev). First install the required dependencies:

Author: We're not only adding vitest, so that sub-headline is a bit misleading. Maybe "Adding testing packages to your project"?

<TabsCodeBlocks>
  <div id="npm">
```bash frame="none"
npm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="yarn">
```bash frame="none"
yarn add -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="pnpm">
```bash frame="none"
pnpm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
</TabsCodeBlocks>

> ### Package explanations

Author: Does it? I think it is more kinda like a footnote to the set up.

- [`vitest`](https://vitest.dev) - testing framework including runner, assertion engine, mocking facilities
- [`jsdom`](https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom) - virtual DOM to simulate a headless browser environment running in node
- [`@solidjs/testing-library`](https://github.com/solidjs/solid-testing-library/blob/main/README.md) - testing library to simplify testing components, directives and primitives, with automatic cleanup
- [`@testing-library/user-event`](https://testing-library.com/docs/user-event/intro) - simulating user events close to reality
- [`@testing-library/jest-dom`](https://testing-library.com/docs/ecosystem-jest-dom) - augments expect with helpful matchers

> If the application is using [SolidStart](/solid-start), then also create a `vitest.config.ts` file:

Author: The only difference is that single file, so I think having a single guide for both is the better choice.

```ts title="vitest.config.ts"
import solid from "vite-plugin-solid"
import { defineConfig } from "vitest/config"

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [solid()],
  resolve: {
    conditions: ["development", "browser"],
  },
})
```

Also, add a `test` script calling `vitest` to `package.json`:

```json title="package.json"
  "scripts": {
    "test": "vitest"
  }
```

If you are using typescript, you may want to add `@testing-library/jest-dom` to `tsconfig.json#compilerOptions.types`:

```json title="tsconfig.json"
  "compilerOptions": {
    // ...
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "jsxImportSource": "solid-js",
    "types": ["vite/client", "@testing-library/jest-dom"]
  }
```

> It is not necessary to add `@testing-library/jest-dom` to the testing options in `vite.config`, since `vite-plugin-solid` automatically detects and loads it if present.

Author: The last sentence does not belong to "Using TypeScript".

## Components testing

Testing components mainly involves three things:

- Rendering the component
- Interacting with the component
- Validating assertions

```tsx title="Counter.test.tsx"
import { test, expect } from "vitest"
import { render } from "@solidjs/testing-library"
import userEvent from "@testing-library/user-event"
import { Counter } from './Counter'

const user = userEvent.setup()

test("increments value", async () => {
  const { getByRole } = render(() => <Counter />)
  const counter = getByRole('button')
  expect(counter).toHaveTextContent("1")
  await user.click(counter)
  expect(counter).toHaveTextContent("2")
})

> ```

Author: Yes, it broke. No, not an issue, I can certainly add Counter.jsx.

`render` from `@solidjs/testing-library` sets up a container, renders the component within and registers it for cleanup so that the container will removed after the successful test. It also handles wrapping the component in contexts and set up a router.

```tsx frame="none"
const renderResult = render(
  () => <MyComponent />, // @solidjs/testing-library requires a function
  { // all options are optional
    container, // manually set up your own container, will not be handled
    baseElement, // parent of container in case it is not supplied
    queries, // manually set up custom queries
    hydrate, // set to `true` to use hydration
    wrapper, // reusable wrapper component to supply context
    location, // sets up a router pointed to the location if provided
  }
)
const {
  asFragment, // function returning the contents of the container
  baseElement, // the parent of the container
  container, // the container in which the component is rendered
  debug, // a function giving some helpful debugging output
  unmount, // manually removing the component from the container
  ...queries, // functions to select elements from the container
} = renderResult
```

> #### Using the right queries

Author: This change is semantically unsound, as it adds a h5 after a h3.

                            query ⎬       ⎨ LabelText
                             find ⎭ AllBy ⎪ Text
                                          ⎩ ...
```

The first and second part depends on if the query should wait for the element to (not) appear and if it should throw if the element cannot be found:

- **getBy**: synchronous, throws if not found or more than 1 matches
- **getAllBy**: synchronous, throws if not found, returns array of matches
- **queryBy**: synchronous, null if not found, error if more than 1 matches
- **queryAllBy**: synchronous, returns array of zero or more matches
- **findBy**: asynchronous, rejected if not found within 1000ms or more than 1 matches, resolves wth element if found
- **findAllBy**: asynchronous, rejected if not found within 1000ms, resolves with array of one or more element(s)

By default, you should use a query starting with `get...`. Use `getAllBy...` if there are multiple elements matching the same query, otherwise use `getBy...`.

There are two exceptions:

1. if the `location` option is used or the component is based on resources, the router will be lazy-loaded, thus the first query after rendering needs to be `find...`

> 2. If it should be tested whether something is *not* rendered, first find something that will be rendered at the same time and then use `query...` to test if the result is null or an empty array.

Author: I reduced that to using the empty array, since then we will get the elements nicely formatted in the error message. Otherwise, we would get the error from expect in case it was one element and the one from the query if there were multiple elements; consistency is king.

> The last part depends on the characteristics of the element you want to select. If possible, try to select for accessible attributes (role, label, placeholder, text, ...):

Author: I have rewritten this with prefix / middle part / suffix.

  const { getByText } = render(() => <DataConsumer />, { wrapper })
  expect(getByText("test")).toBeInTheDocument()
});
```

Wrappers can be re-used if they are created externally. For wrappers with different values, a higher-order component creating the required wrappers can make the tests more concise:

```tsx
const createWrapper = (value) => (props) => 
  <DataContext value={value} {...props}/>
```

<Callout title="Using multiple providers">
If using multiple providers, [solid-primitives](https://primitives.solidjs.community/) has [`<MultiProvider>`](https://primitives.solidjs.community/package/context#multiprovider) to avoid nesting multiple levels of providers
</Callout>

#### Testing routes

For convenience, `render` supports the `location`-option that wraps the rendered component in a router pointing at the given location. Since the `<Router>` component is lazily loaded, the first query after rendering needs to be asynchronous, i.e. `findBy...`:

```tsx
const { findByText } = render(
  () => <Route path="/article/:id" component={Article} />,
  { location: "/article/12345" }
);
expect(await findByText("Article 12345")).toBeInTheDocument()
```

> ### Interacting with components

Author: This would break the previous enumeration of "render / interact / assert", which should all be headlines level 3. Interaction is not a sub-topic of rendering.

const user = userEvent.setup({ advanceTimers: vi.advanceTimersByTime })

vi.useFakeTimers()

describe("pre-login: sign-in", () => {
  const { getByRole, getByLabelText } = render(() => <User />)
  const signUp = getByRole('button', { text: 'Sign-in' })
  // use convenience API click:
  user.click(signUp)
  const name = getByLabelText('Name')
  // use complex keyboard input:
  user.keyboard(name, "{Shift}test{Space}{Shift}user")
  const password = getByLabelText('Password')
  user.keyboard(name, "secret")
  const login = getByRole('button', { text: 'Login' })
  // use touch event
  user.pointer([
    { keys: "[TouchA]" target: login },
    { keys: "[/TouchA]", target: login }
  ])
});
```

### Validating assertions

`vitest` comes with the `expect` function to facilitate assertions that works like:

```tsx frame="none"
expect(subject)[assertion](value)
```

The command supports assertions like `toBe` (reference comparison) and `toEqual` (value comparison) out of the box. For testing inside the DOM, the package `@testing-library/jest-dom` augments it with some helpful additional assertions:

- `.toBeInTheDocument()` - checks if the element actually exists in the DOM

> - `.toBeVisible()` - checks if there is no reason the element should be hidden

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`.toBeVisible()`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tobevisible) - checks if there is no reason the element should be hidden
```

> - `.toHaveTextContent(content)` - checks if the text content matches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`.toHaveTextContent(content)`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohavetextcontent) - checks if the text content matches
```

> - `.toHaveFocus()` - checks if this is the currently focused element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`.toHaveFocus()`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohavefocus) - checks if this is the currently focused element
```

> - `.toHaveAccessibleDescription(description)` - checks accessible description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`.toHaveAccessibleDescription(description)`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohaveaccessibledescription) - checks accessible description
```

- and a [lot more](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#custom-matchers).

> ## Directive testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Directive testing
```

Author: This again makes no semantic sense, as directive testing is not a part of the previous h2 "testing commponents".

> [Directives](/reference/jsx-attributes/use) are reusable behavior for elements. As such, they get a reference to the element and the property value given to them as an accessor. To make testing them more concise, our `@solidjs/testing-library` has a renderDirective function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Directives](/reference/jsx-attributes/use) are reusable behaviors for elements. 
They get a reference and the property value from the element given to them as an accessor. 
To make testing them more concise, [`@solidjs/testing-library` has a `renderDirective`](https://testing-library.com/docs/solid-testing-library/api#renderdirective) function:
```

Author: No, they don't get the property value from the element: the reference is of the element and the property value is from the component. Let's rephrase that to "They get a reference to the HTML element and the property from the directive prop as an accessor."

```ts frame="none"
const renderResult = renderDirective(directive, {
  initialValue, // value initially added to the argument signal
  targetElement, // opt. node name or element used as target for the directive
  ...renderOptions, // see render options
})
const {
  arg, // getter for the directive's argument
  setArg, // setter for the directive's argument
  ...renderResults, // see render results
} = renderResult
```

> The `container` from the `...renderResults` will contain the targetElement (default is a `<div>`). That and the ability to manipulate the `arg` signal are helpful in testing directives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In `...renderResults`, the container will contain the `targetElement`, which defaults to a `<div>`. This, along with the ability to modify the `arg` signal, are helpful when testing directives.
```

> If for example there is a directive that handles the Fullscreen API, it could be tested like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If, for example, you have a directive that handles the Fullscreen API, you can test it like this:
```

<TabsCodeBlocks>
  <div id="fullscreen.test.ts">
```ts frame="none"
import { test, expect, vi } from "vitest"
import { renderDirective } from "@solidjs/testing-library"
import { createFullScreen } from "./fullscreen"

test("toggles fullscreen", () => {
  const targetElement = document.createElement("div")
  const fs = vi.spyOn(targetElement, "fullscreen")
  const [setArg, container] = renderDirective(createFullScreen, false)
  setArg(true)
  expect(fs).toHaveBeenCalled()
})
```
  </div>
  <div id="fullscreen.ts">
```ts frame="none"
import { Accessor } from "solid-js"

export const fullscreen = (ref: HTMLElement, active: Accessor<boolean>) =>
  createEffect(() => {
    const isActive = document.fullscreenElement === ref
    if (active() && !isActive) {
      ref.requestFullScreen().catch(() => {})
    } else if (!active() && isActive) {
      document.exitFullScreen()
    }
  })
```
  </div>
</TabsCodeBlocks>

> ## Primitive testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Primitive testing
```

> If the reference to the element is not needed, parts of state and logic can be put into reusable hooks or primitives. Since those do not require any elements, using `render` to test them would require a component that otherwise has no use. To circumvent that, there is a `renderHook` utility that simulates such a component without actually rendering anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the reference to an element is not needed, parts of state and logic can be put into reusable hooks or primitives. 
Since these do not require elements, there is no need for `render` to test them since it would require a component that has no other use.
To avoid this, there is a [`renderHook` utility](https://testing-library.com/docs/solid-testing-library/api#renderhook) that simulates a component without actually rendering anything.
```

```ts frame="none"
const renderResult = renderHook(hook, {
  initialProps, // an array with arguments being supplied to the hook
  wrapper, // same as the wrapper optionss for `render`
})
const {
  result, // return value of the hook (mutable, destructuring fixes it)
  cleanup, // manually remove the traces of the test from the DOM
  owner, // the owner running the hook to use with `runWithOwner()` 
} = renderResult
```

A primitive that manages the state of a counter could be tested like this:

```ts frame="none"
import { test, expect } from "vitest"
import { renderHook } from "@solidjs/testing-library"
import { createCounter } from "./counter"

test("increments count", () => {
  const { result } = renderHook(createCounter)
  expect(result.count).toBe(0)
  result.increment()
  expect(result.count).toBe(1)
})
```

> ## Testing effects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Testing effects
```

> Since effects may happen asynchronous, it can be difficult to test them. `@solidjs/testing-library` comes with a `testEffect` function that takes another function, which will receive a `done` function that can be called once the tests are over. It returns a promise that is resolved once done is called. Errors that would hit the next boundary are used to reject the returned promise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since effects may happen asynchronously, it can be difficult to test them. 
[`@solidjs/testing-library` comes with a `testEffect` function](https://testing-library.com/docs/solid-testing-library/api#async-methods) that takes another function that receives a `done` function to be called once tests are over.
Once `done` is called, it returns a promise that is resolved.
Any errors that would hit the next boundary are used to reject the returned promise.
```

Author: It is not done that returns the promise, but testEffect; done only triggers its resolution.

> A test using it might look similar to this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example test using `testEffect` may look like this:
```

```ts frame="none"
const [value, setValue] = createSignal(0)
return testEffect(done =>
  createEffect((run: number = 0) => {
    if (run === 0) {
      expect(value()).toBe(0)
      setValue(1)
    } else if (run === 1) {
      expect(value()).toBe(1)
      done()
    }
    return run + 1
  })
)
```

> ## Integration/E2E testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Integration/E2E testing
```

> Some issues can only be found once the code is running in the environment it is supposed to run in. Since integration and end-to-end tests are agnostic to frameworks, all proven approaches will work equally for Solid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some issues can only be found once the code is running in the environment it is supposed to run in. 
Since integration and end-to-end tests are agnostic to frameworks, all proven approaches will work equally for Solid.
```

---

> title: Testing your app

Author: I've made it upper case; I would deem a consistency check to be out of scope for this PR.

order: 6
---

This guide should cover the basics of testing a Solid.js application to inspire confidence during the further development.

## Set up testing

The preferred method of testing solid applications is [vitest](https://vitest.dev). First install the required dependencies:

<TabsCodeBlocks>
  <div id="npm">
```bash frame="none"
npm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="yarn">
```bash frame="none"
yarn add -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="pnpm">
```bash frame="none"
pnpm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
</TabsCodeBlocks>

### Package explanations

- `vitest` - testing framework including runner, assertion engine, mocking facilities
- `jsdom` - virtual DOM to simulate a headless browser environment running in node
- `@solidjs/testing-library` - testing library to simplify testing components, directives and primitives, with automatic cleanup
- `@testing-library/user-event` - simulating user events close to reality

> - `@testing-library/jest-dom` - augments expect with helpful matchers

Reviewer 2: The more links the better, honestly. Anything that might cause someone to go "what is this" it's easier to just link them out to their sites

> - `@testing-library/jest-dom` - augments expect with helpful matchers

Author: linked.

If the application is using [SolidStart](/solid-start), then also create a `vitest.config.ts` file:

```ts title="vitest.config.ts"
import solid from "vite-plugin-solid"
import { defineConfig } from "vitest/config"

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [solid()],
  resolve: {
    conditions: ["development", "browser"],
  },
})
```

Also, add a `test` script calling `vitest` to `package.json`:

```json title="package.json"
  "scripts": {
    "test": "vitest"
  }
```

If you are using typescript, you may want to add `@testing-library/jest-dom` to `tsconfig.json#compilerOptions.types`:

```json5 title="tsconfig.json
  "compilerOptions": {
    // ...
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "jsxImportSource": "solid-js",

>     "types": [vite/client", "@testing-library/jest-dom"]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    "types": ["vite/client", "@testing-library/jest-dom"]
```

```bash frame="none"
npm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="yarn">
```bash frame="none"
yarn add -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
  <div id="pnpm">
```bash frame="none"
pnpm i -D vitest jsdom @solidjs/testing-library @testing-library/user-event @testing-library/jest-dom
```
  </div>
</TabsCodeBlocks>

### Package explanations

- [`vitest`](https://vitest.dev) - testing framework that includes runner, assertion engine, and mocking facilities
- [`jsdom`](https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom) - a virtual DOM used to simulate a headless browser environment running in node
- [`@solidjs/testing-library`](https://github.com/solidjs/solid-testing-library/blob/main/README.md) - a library to simplify testing components, directives, and primitives, with automatic cleanup
- [`@testing-library/user-event`](https://testing-library.com/docs/user-event/intro) - used to simulate user events that are closer to reality
- [`@testing-library/jest-dom`](https://testing-library.com/docs/ecosystem-jest-dom) - augments expect with helpful matchers

> When using [SolidStart](/solid-start), create a `vitest.config.ts` file:

Author: I have reorganized the section into a "Testing configuration" section, removed the callout for TS and instead added subsections "TypeScript configuration" and "SolidStart configuration". This way seems most sensible for me.

For testing inside the DOM, the package `@testing-library/jest-dom` augments it with some helpful additional assertions:

- [`.toBeInTheDocument()`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tobeinthedocument) - checks if the element actually exists in the DOM
- [`.toBeVisible()`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tobevisible) - checks if there is no reason the element should be hidden
- [`.toHaveTextContent(content)`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohavetextcontent) - checks if the text content matches
- [`.toHaveFocus()`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohavefocus) - checks if this is the currently focused element
- [`.toHaveAccessibleDescription(description)`](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#tohaveaccessibledescription) - checks accessible description
- and a [lot more](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom?tab=readme-ov-file#custom-matchers).

## Directive testing

[Directives](/reference/jsx-attributes/use) are reusable behaviors for elements.

> They get a reference to the HTML element and the property from the directive prop as an accessor as arguments.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is throwing me off a bit - does this rewording make sense? The last part of the sentence (`as an accessor as arguments`) is the part that is confusing.

```suggestion
They receive an accessor as an argument for the HTML element and the property from the direct prop.
```

Author: Again, this is technically wrong. The type signature of a directive looks like this: `(ref: HTMLElement, prop: Accessor<any>) => void`. I've tried to make it even more obvious:

"They receive the HTML element they are bound to as their first and an accessor of the directive prop as their second argument."

To make testing them more concise, [`@solidjs/testing-library` has a `renderDirective`](https://testing-library.com/docs/solid-testing-library/api#renderdirective) function:

```ts frame="none"
const renderResult = renderDirective(directive, {
  initialValue, // value initially added to the argument signal
  targetElement, // opt. node name or element used as target for the directive
  ...renderOptions, // see render options
})
const {
  arg, // getter for the directive's argument
  setArg, // setter for the directive's argument
  ...renderResults, // see render results
} = renderResult
```

In `...renderResults`, the container will contain the `targetElement`, which defaults to a `<div>`.
This, along with the ability to modify the `arg` signal, are helpful when testing directives.

> If, for example, you have a directive that handles the Fullscreen API, you can test it like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If, for example, you have a directive that handles the [Fullscreen API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API), you can test it like this:
```
